What Mega Chupa Chups Taught Me About Artificial Intelligence

AI may be the emerging platform of 2017.
by Andrew Blair
Turns out people are fairly predictable given certain situations. I learned this lesson at my first job working at a store that sold wacky t-shirts and keychains at the mall back in the 90’s. The store also kept a display of Mega Chupa Chups, giant lollipops each the size of a hammer, situated next to the register in a way that made almost everyone that came in comment on them. As a rite of passage, each new employee would watch as 97% (yes I counted) of the customers walked up to the register and queried almost word for word the same thing the previous customer had commented, “Wow, are those real?”
To which myself and the other employees always responded begrudgingly, “Yes, they are real.” This went on hundreds of times a day, without fail. We even created a sign with brightly emblazoned sharpie that read, “Yes, they are real.” Customers were amazed to see we had somehow anticipated their question, almost as if it was a magic trick.
In reality, we just relied on the fact that human beings tend to be predictable when it comes to certain actions, which is why there’s a growing opportunity for computer intelligence applications in today’s modern media culture.
Many brands have already seen similar patterns in customer interactions through websites and call centers that address commonly asked questions (otherwise known as the “FAQ”). The goal for companies is to find a way to answer as many of these common questions without human intervention.
That’s where Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology comes in. If I was working at that mall today, I think our simple sign would be more complex and interactive. Now, we might program a robot to stand behind the register and tell everyone with a smile, “Yes these Mega Chupa Chups are real.” Maybe we could even program our robot to up-sale. For example, “Would you like to purchase a Chupa Chup today?” Companies are actively pursuing computer engagement with humans: according to Bank of America Merrill Lynch, the global market for AI systems will reach $70 billion in 2020, up from $14.9 billion in 2014.
A good tip for marketers is to think of AI as another engagement platform, but with different rules (just like Snapchat and Facebook aren’t the same, neither is AI quite like anything else). Brands can determine their AI comfort level, and then decide whether to build a custom experience, or to port over an application from another platform.

Cyber-chatting with CoverGirl. [Ad Age]
CoverGirl launched an AI application last December that mimicked their influencer Kalani Hilliker. This provided them scale for an existing program while also giving them a presence on Kik, with over 300M registered users worldwide (and 6,000+ bots!).
This is just one example of growing experimentation and investment. AI is creating opportunities for marketers who are paying attention, in areas such as:
1/Customer service — AI start-up Soul Machines is run by two-time Academy Award winner Mark Sagar. Soul Machines’ aim is to give chatbots and virtual assistants realistic facial expressions, and the ability to read yours. They are currently working on a customer service assistant for the Australian Government. Ivy is “the world’s first and only intelligent texting platform for hotels,” and is powered by IBM Watson. And airlines like KLM are using the technology to interact with their customers via messaging apps.
2/Retail engagement — Mall Of America used Watson’s conversational API to create a holiday-themed chatbot — named “E.L.F.” (Experience List Formulator) — which helped guests plan a personalized shopping experience. E.L.F. guided guests through a series of questions related to how much time they have to spend and what they’re looking for. The chatbot offered a selection of retailers, rides and other activities during the allotted time period. Nordstrom launched its recent chatbot over the holidays as well, helping users select gift items by asking them a series of questions about who they are shopping for.
3/Marketing channel management— Kik, Telegram, WhatsApp, Facebook Messenger (and others) represent millions of potential people into your brand. Marketing inside of chat products is still fairly new. This means that brands have a new way to engage with a lot of people quickly (more if they can get to the top of search results), in a way that only appears to be one-on-one. Another approach that is gaining momentum is to build an omnichannel bot that can plug into different platforms and respond to customers in real-time. For example, Twitter just announced their messenger API that allows developers to create bot experiences that plug directly into Twitter Direct Messages. Whether you’re building an experience inside of a specific messaging platform, or an omnichannel experience that can plug into every platform, there’s a growing customer expectation of real-time response, to which AI can contribute.
4/Virtual assistant communication — Last year, Mark Zuckerberg showed off Jarvis, an AI interface he built for his home. Smart homes are no longer the toys for the rich: Amazon Echo alone has sold over 5 million units, and Google Home is here. Additionally, Siri, Alexa, and Samsung’s Bixby are now helping us get through our days. Soon, Alexa will tell you why Tide is her favorite laundry detergent and Siri will explain why she can’t live without Tostitos.
Most technologies are scoffed at when they are new, only to be embraced in due time by marketers. Think broadcast TV, cable, Web 1.0, email, social…and now, Artificial Intelligence. As marketers, we always have a choice, and ours is to embrace what’s next. Even if that is giant lollipops.