Chatbots as Loyal Friends to Humans: Age of Artificial Intelligence (AI)
The Story of Chatbots (using Artificial Intelligence AI) that has Gone Viral


Credit: Marketing Land
Have you come across the term “Chatbots?” Though you may not be acquainted with the exact definition of a “chatbot,” I am sure you know the basics about it. In fact, it is hard for you to not have used Artificial Intelligence powered chatbots to date.
Before we jump in to understanding how and when we use chatbots in our daily lives, let’s understand its scientific definition first.
What Are Chatbots?

Credit: TheNextWeb
Chatbots are computer programs that use Artificial Intelligence to communicate with humans and serve them with the required information. It is designed (in a way) to impersonate another human being and give friendly replies using Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Machine Learning (ML) technologies.
The following bullet points explain what you, as a user, can expect from chatbots:
An efficient and well-designed chatbot imparts the feeling of having a conversation with a friend, rather than talking to a computer system or robot.
Chatbots transform the way you engage or interact with the internet to undertake an array of tasks. This may range from quenching general information, making hotel reservations to booking cabs for commute.
Not only is the look of chatbots humanistic, even the chatting experience is enjoyable and fun.
Surprising Chatbot Statistics: Worth Wondering
If the concept of chatbots sounded like an impractical dream, here are some statistics that will blow your mind:
More than 45% consumers prefer to contact a business via messaging than via email. This number is a direct hint at bright future of chatbots for business use.
There are approximately 35,000 chatbots active on Facebook Messenger.
Microsoft, Oracle, Google, Twitter and IBM are in talks to improvise their customer’s experience with chatbots. They are planning to implement Artificial intelligence in the customer service segment till 2020.
Humans and Chatbots: Artificial Intelligence Influencing Everyday Interactions
Owning an iPhone, Android smartphone or even using Facebook Messenger makes you a chatbot user. Did this statement take you by surprise? Sit back, I will explain this reality with examples and illustrations.
Apple’s Chatbot
How many times have you asked your iPhone or iPad about something and it answered you instantly? Lot many times, isn’t it? That is Apple’s chatbot, a virtual personal assistant named ‘Siri’ who is programmed to be at your service anytime and anywhere!

Credit: Cult of Mac
Google’s Chatbot
Alternatively, Android users have had several helpful conversations with Google Assistant to search for nearby restaurants, gas stations and so on. It acts like your personal Google, or say personal assistant to whom you can ask questions or even tell it to do things.

Credit: Graphic of Mac
Facebook’s Chatbot
Facebook, one of the largest social media platforms, uses a chatbot in the form of Facebook Messenger. It is aimed at improvising user’s experience with Messenger with the implementation of an Artificial Intelligence powered chatbot.

Credit: Forbes
Why Should You Embrace Chatbots: The Future of Online Businesses
Businesses are leveraging the power of chatbots to their advantage. Good customer service is the key to earn loyal and repetitive clients. In this endeavor to offer the best of customer service, online businesses are now trying chatbots.
Here are few examples of the most commonly used chatbots:
Grocery Chatbot: The retail industry is transforming consumers’ online shopping experience by helping them pick up and order groceries in a redefined manner with chatbots.
Finance Planning Chatbot: The finance industry finds it purpose by introducing chatbots that convey the message to an investor better than an investment agent. This smart bot helps users in planning their money by suggesting most beneficial sources and investment plans.
News Chatbot: News and information industry are serving the breaking news and required information to its set of audience through chatbots.
Weather Indicator Chatbot: This bot is specifically dedicated to presenting the current weather information whenever requested by the user.
Personal Help Chatbot: As the concept of chatbot says, it is designed to serve humans like another human being. Staying on its words, it helps users in problematic situations by suggesting effective solutions and remedies.
Did you know that tens of thousands of chatbots were introduced in the last year? This number explains the rising trend of artificial intelligence and chatbots. The influence of this superior technology on people is unavoidable, which has compelled businesses to adapt to them at the earliest possible time.
High level enterprises as well as startups and SMBs are exploring possibilities with chatbots that could revolutionize the way businesses interact with customers. To avoid getting lost in the rush, it is better to be early adopter of this technology and gain a competitive edge. Get a friend who can interact about your brand to customers in form of chatbot.